1
GHANA M ETEORO LOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2025
ARRANGEMENT  OF SECTIONS
Section
Establish ment of the Meteor ological Authority
1. Establish ment of the Authority
2. Objec t of the Authority
3. Funct ions of the Authority
4. Governing  body of the Authority
5. Funct ions of the Board
6. Tenure of office of members  of the Board
7. Meetings of the Board
8. Disclosure of interest
9. Establishment of committees
10. Organisation and operation  of the National Framework for Climate Services
11. Offices of the Authority
12. Allowances
13. Policy directives
Administr ative prov isions
14. Director -General  of the Authority
15. Functions of the Director -General
16. Principal Officers of the Authority
17. Secretary  to the Board
18. Appointment of other Staff
19. Funds of the Authority
20. Bank Account of the Authority
21. Administrative expenses of the Authority
22. Internal Audit Unit
23. Accounts and audit
24. Annual report  and other reports
25. Borrowing powers
26. Tax exemption
National Meteorological Fund
27. Establishment of the National Meteorological Fund
28. Object s of the Fund
29. Application of monies for the Fund
30. Sources of money for the Fund
31. Bank account for the Fund
32. Payment s from the Fund
33. Management of the Fund
34. Investment of the Fund
Licensing  and Related  Matters
2
35. Requirement  for licence  to operate
36. Application  for a licence
37. Conditions  for grant  of a licence
38. Grant of licence
39. Non-transferability  of licence
40. Renewal of licence
41.  Suspension of  licence
42. Revocation  of licence
43. Restoration of licence
44. Appeals to the Tribunal
45. Confidentiality
46. Improper use official seal of the organi sation
47.  Offence s
48. Offences  by a body of persons
Miscellaneous Provisions
49. Power to enter land or premises
50. Execution of contract
51. Regula tions
52. Interpretation
53. Repeal and savings
54. Transitional Provisions
SCHEDULE
(Section  46)
3
A
BILL
ENTITLED
GHANA M ETEORO LOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2025
AN ACT  to provide for the establishment of a Meteorological Authority as a regulatory body  to
license  and regulat e the operations of meteorological data services providers ; to spearhead
meteorological research  and training ; advice on all weather and climate issues and to ensure that all
meteorological services and practices  meet the international standard s and for related matters.
PASSED by Parliament  and assented  to by the President
Establish ment of the Meteor ological Authority
Establish ment of  the Authority
1. (1) There is es tablished by th is Act ,  the Ghana Meteorological  Authority as a body
corporate .
(2) The Authority  may for the performance of the functions of the Authority acquire
4
and hold proper ty, dispose of property  and enter into any cont ract or  related transaction .
(3) Where th ere is an  hindrance  to the acqu isition of land, the land  may be acquired
for the Authority under  the Lands Act, 2020  (Act 1036 ) and the cost shall be borne by the Authority.
Objec t of the Authority
2. The ob ject of the Authority  is to provide meteorological services  in the count ry and  ensure
the op eration and maintenance  of international standa rds and practices in  meteorology in the
count ry.
Funct ions of the Authority
3. To achieve the object under section 2, t he Authority sha ll
(a) advise Govern ment on  meteorology gene rally;
(b) issue w eather forecasts for the s afe opera tion of ai rcraft, ocean -going vessel s, oil
rigs and other  socio-econo mic activities;
(c) provide meteorological infor mation, advice  and warn ings for the b enefit of
agriculture, civil and military aviati on, surface a nd marine tr ansport, operational
hydrology and manag ement of energy and water resources to mitigate the effec ts
of nat ural disasters such as floods, stor ms and d roughts on soci o-econo mic
develop ment and projects;
(d) promote the use of meteorology in agriculture, prevention of dr ought and
desertification act ivities;
(e) establish,  organi se and manage surface and u pper air obs ervational sta tion networ ks;
(f) collect, process, and disseminate meteorological infor mation national ly and
internationally in a ccordance with  the rules, practices a nd procedur es establis hed
under i nternational conven tions;
(g) ensure uniform  standards of obs ervation of meteorologic al pheno mena in the
country;
(h) train, conduct and undertake research p articularly in the field of tropica l,
agricultural, hydro logical and other  aspects of meteorology;
(i) store meteorolo gical data and infor mation f or the purpos es of planning and
implementation of  infrast ructural projects;
(j) develop a nd prov ide telecom munication systems for meteorological purposes on ly;
(k) participate in local and in ternational tra ining and research  in meteorology and
climatology and in o ther related fie lds in co-operation w ith other relevant
institutions and authorities conce rned with applied meteorological research;
(l) collaborate with  relevant foreign and i nternational or ganisations for  the purposes  of
this Act;
(m) be the sole authority to app rove the establishment of  meteorological stations for
meteorological observations and the approved stations share data with the Authority ;
(n) provide consultancy  services in  meteorology to the pu blic;
(o) calibrate, develop and  fabric ate meteorologic al equipment  for internal use and
expo rt;
(p) condu ct investi gations in to meteorological issues and advise the Minister
accordingly;
(q) ensure d ue compliance with conventions, pr otocols and any other  relevant standards
and re commended pra ctices of the  World Me teorological Organisat ion; and
5
(r) perform  such o ther functions as are incidental to  the objec ts of the Authority  or as
the Minister in consultation  with the Bo ard may di rect.
Governing  body of the Authority.
4.  (1)  The gove rning body of the Authority is  a Board  consisting of
(a) the Minister , as chairperson ;
(b) the Dir ector-General of the Authority;
(c) a repres entative  each not below the rank of a Director nominated by the
respective Minister  responsible  for
(i) Communication, Digital Technology and Innovations ;
(ii) Transport;
(iii) Enviro nment and Science;
(d)  a repres entative  each from
(i) the Water Reso urces Com mission not  below the rank of a
Director;
(ii) the Ghana Instit ution of  Engineer ing;
(iii)a university in  the coun try that offers Meteorology a nd Cli mate Scien ce
nominated by the Minister;
(iv) the air transport indus try; and
(e) two other perso ns one of whom is a wo man nominated by the President.
(2) The President shall, in accordance with article 70 of the Constitution, appoint the
members of the Board
(3)  The President s hall in making appoin tments under paragraph (e) of subsection 1 ,
have regard to the expertise  and experience  of the pers ons in matters rel ated to  the functions  of
the Authority.
Funct ions of the Board
5. The Board sh all
(a) ensure  the implementation of the ob jects and functions of the Authority;
(b) ensure the implementation of rul es, reg ulations and p rocedures laid down by the
World Meteorological Org anisation in accordance with provi sions under this Ac t;
(c) manage   the Nat ional Meteorological Fund;  and
(d) formulate policies for the efficient  and effective performance of the functions  of the
Authority.
Tenure of office of members  of the Board
6. (1) A member of the Board shall hold office for a period of three years and is
eligible for re -appointment for  another term only.
(2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to the Director - General or any other person who is a
member of the Board  by virtue of office.
(3)  A member of the Board other than the Director -General may, at any time by letter
addressed to the President through the Minister, resign from office.
6
(4) A member of the Board , other than the Director -General who is absent from
three consecutive meeting of the Board without sufficient cause cease s to be a member of
the Board.
(5) A member may , at any time,  resign from office in writing addressed to the  President
through the Minister.
(6)Where a member of the Board is for sufficient reason, unable to act as a member of  the
Board, the Minister shall determine whether the inability would result in  the declaration of a
vacancy.
(7) Where there is a vacancy
(a) under  subsection (3),(4), (5) or subsection (2) of section 8 ,
(b) as a result of a declaration under  subsection (6), or
(c)by reason of the death of a member,
the Minister shall notify the President of the vacancy and the President shall appoint a person
to fill the vacancy.
Meetings of the Board.
7. (1) The Bo ard shall meet at least once every three months  for the conduct of business at a
time and p lace determined by the chairperson .
(2) The ch airperson s hall, at the req uest in writing of not less than on e-third of the
membership of the  Board, convene a n  extraordinary  meeting of the Board  at a time and
place determined by the Board .
(3) The quo rum at a meeting of  the Board is seven members.
(4) The chairperson  shall preside at meetings of the Board   and in the absence of the
chairperson , a member of the Board elected by the members present  from  among their  number
shall presid e.
(5) Matters before the Board shall  be dec ided by a majority of members present and
voting and in the event of equality of votes, the p erson presiding sh all have a cast ing vote.
(6) The Bo ard may co-opt a p erson to attend a  meeting of the Board  but that person
shall not  vote on a matter for decision at the meeting.
(7) The procee dings of  the Boa rd sha ll not be invalidated  because of a  vacancy a mong
the members or by a defect in the appoint ment or  qualification of  a member of the Board .
(8) Subject to this section, the Board  shall determine the procedure for its meetings
of the Board .
Disclosure of interest
8. (1) A member of the Board who has in interest in a matter for consideration
(a) shall disclose in writing the nature of the interest and the disclosure shall form part
of the record for the consideration of the matter; and
(b) is disqualified from being present  at or participating in the deliberations of the
Board except in respect of that matter.
7
(2) A member ceases to be a member of the Board if the member if that member has an  interest
in the matter before the Board and
(a) fails to disclose that interest; o r
(b) is present at or participates in the deliberations of the Board in respect of that
matter.
(3) Without limiting any further cause of action that may be instituted against the member ,
the Board shall recover any benefit derived by a member who contravenes  subsection(1)  in addition
to the revocation of the appointment of that member.
Establishment of committees
9. (1) The Board may establish a committee consisting of members of the Board and non-
members of the Board or both to perform a function of the Board.
(2) A committ ee composed of members and non -members of the Board shall be
chaired by a  member of the Board .
(3) A Committee of the Board composed of non -members only is advisory.
(4) Section  8 applies to members of a committee of the Board.
Organi sation and operation of the National Framework for Climate Services
10. The Minister shall be responsible to
(a) organi se and operation alise of the National Framework for Climate Services ;
(b) oversee the establishment of the Inter-ministerial Committee for the operation of
the National Framework for Climate Services ; and
(c) establish the Scientific and Technical Committee for the operations of the
National Framework for Climate Services.
Office s of the Authority
11. (1) The Authority shall establish regional offices of the Authority in the regional
capitals.
(2) The Authority may establish other offices within a region as the Board may
determine.
(3) An office established by the Authority shall perform t he functions determined by the
Authority.
Allowances
12. Members of the Board and members of a committee shall be paid allowances
approved by the Minister in consultation with the Minister for Finance.
Policy directives
13. The Minister may give directives to the Board  on matters of policy and the Board
shall comply
8
Administrative provisions
Director -General  of the Authority
14.  (1) The President shall , in accordance with article 195, appoint a Director - General
for the Authority.
(2) The Director -General
(a) is the chief executive of the Authority ; and
(b) shall hold office on terms and conditions specified in the letter of appointment .
Functions of the Director -General
15. (1) The Director -General is
(a) responsible for the day to  day administration of the Authority;
(b) responsible for the implementation of the decisions of the Authority;  and
(c) answerable to the Board .
(2) The Director -General shall perform any other function assigned by the Board.
(3)  The Director -General may delegate a function to an officer of the Authority but
is not relieved of the ultimate responsibility for the  performance of the  delegat ed function .
(4) The Director -General shall be the permanent representative of Ghana to the World
Meteorological Organization in accordance with the provisions of Regulation 6 of the World
Meteorological Organization, Basic Document No. 15.
Principal officers of the Authority
16.     (1) The Director -General shall be assisted by two Deputy Director s-General and other
principal officers as the Board may determine.
(2) The President shall in accordance with the advice of the Board given in consultation
with the Public Services Commission appoint the two Deputy Director s-General and other
principal officers of the A uthority.
Secretary to the Board.
17.  (1) The Board shall designate the head of legal services of the Authority as Secretary to
the  Board.
(2) The Secretary shall
(a) be a legal practitioner of less than 10 years standing as a lawyer;
(b)  subject to the directions of the Board, arrange the business of the meetings of
the Board;
(c) record and keep the minutes of the meetings and proceedings of the Board;  and
(d) perform any other function as the Board and the Director -General may in
writing, direct .
Appointment of other Staff
18.  (1) The President shall in accordance with article 195, appoint other officers and staff of
the Authority necessary for the effective and efficient performance of the functions of the
Authority.
9
(2) The Board may  on the recommendations of the Director -General engage the services of
experts and consultants as the Board may determine.
(3)  The appointment of officers of the Authority shall be made by the President in
accordance with the advice of the Board given in consultation with the Public Services
Commission and upon such terms and conditions as the appointing authority shall determine.
Funds of the Authority
19.  The Fund of the Authority include
(a) moneys approved by Parliament in the budget;
(b) administ rative penalties payable under this Act;
(c) loans, donations and grants;
(d) moneys accruing to the Authority from investments;
(e) any other internally generated fund;
Bank account of the Authority
20. Money for the Authority shall be paid into a bank account opened for the purpose with the
approval of the Controller and Accountant -General.
Administrative expenses of the Authority
21. The administrative expenses of the Authority shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund .
Internal Audit Unit
22. (1) The Authority shall have an Internal Audit Unit in accordance with section 83 of
the Public Financial Management Act, 2016 (Act 921).
(2) The Internal Audit Unit shall be headed by an Internal Auditor who shall be
appointed in accordance with the Internal Audit Agency Act, 2003 (Act 658).
(3)  The Internal Auditor is responsible for the internal audit of the Authority.
(4)  The Internal Auditor shall, subject to subsections (3) and (4) of section 16 of the
Internal Audit A gency Act, 2003 (Act 658), at intervals of three months
(a)  a prepare and submit to the Board, a report on the internal  audit carried out
during the period of three months  immediately preceding the preparation of
the report; and
(b) make recommendations in each report, with respect to  matters which appear
to the Internal Auditor as necessary  for the conduct of the affairs of the
Authority.
(5) The Internal Auditor shall, in accordance with subsection 4 of section 16 of the
Internal Audit Agency Act, 2003 (Act 658), submit a copy of each report prepared under this
section to the Director -General and the chairperson of the Board
Accounts and audit
23.  (1) The Board shall keep books, records and returns of account and other documents
relevant  to accounts in a form approved by the Auditor -General.
(2) The Board shall submit the accounts of the Authority to the Auditor -General within
three months after the end of the financial year.
10
(3) The Auditor -General within six months after the end of the  immediately preceding
financial year , audit the accounts of the Authority and forward a copy each of the audited report to
the Minister and the Board.
(4) The financial year of the Authority is the same as the financial year of the government.
Annual report and other reports.
24.  (1) The Board shall within thirty days  after receipt of the audit report, submit an
annual report to the Minister covering the activities and operations of the Authority for the year to
which the annual report relates.
(2)The annual report shall include the report of the Auditor -General .
(3) The Minister shall within two months after receipt of the annual report, submit
the report to Parliament with a statement that the Minister considers necessa ry.
(4) The Board shall submit to the Minister any other report which the Minister may
require in writing.
Borrowing powers
25.  (1) Subject to article 181 of the Co nstitution and section 76 of the Public Financial
Management Act, 2016 (Act 921) and with prior consent in writing of the Minister responsible for
Finance, the Authority may borrow money from a body corporate, financial market  or any other
person,
(2) For the purposes of securing the money borrowed,  the Authority  may mortgage,
charge or pledge a right, ti tle or an interest in any of the properties of the Authority.
Tax exemption
26. Subject to article 174 of the Constitution  and the Exemptions Act 2022 , Act ( 1038) the
Authority  is exempt  from  the payment of taxes that the Minister, may in writing, determine, with
the prior approval of Parliament.
National Meteorological Fund
Establis hment of  the National Meteorological Fund
27.  There is es tablished by th is Act  the Nation al Meteorological Fun d.
Object s of the Fund
28. …………………………………….
Application of moneys for the Fund
29. Mon eys of the Fund shall be applied for
(a) publici ty and promoti on of the activities of the Authority;
(b) research, studies and investigations relat ed to the functions of the Authority;
(c) human resource development;
(d) the development and maintenance of any property vested in or owned by the
Authority;  and
(e) other purposes relevant to the obj ect of the  Authority as the Board in consultation
with the Minister shall determine.
11
Sources of money for the Fund
30.  The sources of money for the Fund  are
(a) monies  approved by Parliament;
(b) fees and cha rges accruing to the Authority in the pe rformance of  the functions  of
the Authority ;
(c) ten percent  of all Landing Charg es collected by the Ghana Civil Aviation
Authority in acco rdance  with se ction 71 of the Ghana Civil  Aviation Act, 20 24
(Act 1120 );
(d) ten percent  of Over-flight Charg es collected by  the Ghana  Civil  Aviation
Authority  in acco rdance with se ction 71 of the Ghana Civil  Aviation Act, 2024
(Act 1120);
(e) five percent  of Airport Tax c ollected by an aerodro me ope rator in ac cordance
with section 1 of the Ai rport Tax Act, 1963 (Act  209);
(f)  one percent  of the tax -exclusive cost of construction works contract in respect
of all government and non -government buildings, roads, dams,
telecommunication masts and other related projects in Ghana, for the provision of
meteorological information.
(g) two and half per cent of pre -tax contract value of construction works .
(h)  three percent  per barrel of crude oil produced by offshore and onshore
Companies .
(i) three percent  of all registration and licenc ing fees collected by the  Fisheries
Commission ;
(j)  ten percent  of gross revenue of freight of all international inbound and outbound
cargo from ships or shipping companies operating in Ghana collected and paid
over to the Ghana Maritime Administration Authority.
(k) three percent  of all habour and river guide dues and rates collec ted by the
National Inland Waterways Authority .
(l)  seven and half percent  of all harbour and port charges/ dues and pilotage
dues/charges collected by the Ghana Ports and Harbour Authority.
(m) five percent  of all premiums collected by the Ghana Agricultural Insurance Pool
from policy holders, for the provision of agro -meteorological services.
(n) five percent  of the total premiums collected annually by agricultural insurance
providers and related entities as a cost recovery fee for the provision of agro -
meteorological data and information.
(o) fees and funds from meteorological training schools
(p) fees and funds from meteorological calibration laboratory
(q) interest  from investments;
(r) loans;  and
(s) grants, donations and gifts.
Bank account for the Fund
31. The moneys for the Fund shall be paid into a bank account opened by the Board for the
purpose with the approval of the Controller and Accountant - General.
12
Payments from the Fund
32. All payments from the Fund shall be by cheque and signed by
(a)  the Chairperson of the Board or in the absence of the Chairperson any member
of the  Board designated to do so; and
(b) the Director -General.
Management of the F und
33.  (1) The Fu nd sha ll be administered by the Bo ard.
(2) The Bo ard shall for the purpose of administration  of  the Fund
(a) formulate pol icies to  gene rate money for the  Fund;
(b) deter mine the allocation to be made towa rds the objects of the Fund; and
(c) determine annual  targets of the Fund.
(3)  Sections 23 and 24 apply to the Fund.
Invest ment of the Fund
34. The Board may inv est a part of the Fund as it consi ders approp riate in securities as
the Minister responsible  for Finance .
Licensing  and Related  Matters
Requirement  for licence  to operate
35. A person shall not
(a) provide  meteorological data services,
(b) provide  services as  a meteorological agent,
(c) engage  in any business  connected with  the provision  of meteorological services , or
(d) engage  in meteorological transactions
unless that  person  has obtained a license  to operate as  a Meteorological Services Provider or A gent
from the Authority .
Application  for a licence
36. (1) A person shall apply to the Authority for a licence as a Meteorological Service
Provider or Agent.
(2) An application for a  licence  shall
(a) be made to  the Authority  in the form  determined by  the Board ;
(b) in the case of a company, society, association or partnership be accompanied with
an attestation  that officers  of the company,  society,  association  or partnership  do
not have any criminal record; and
(c)  where  appropriate,  be accompanied  with the prescribed  fee for the examination
of equipment.
Conditions  for grant  of a licence
37. (1) The Authority may issue  a licence to a  person if the  person  has met all the
requirements  determined by the Authority.
(2) The Authority shall publish the requirements for application for the licence.
13
Grant of licence
38. (1) The Authority shall, on receipt of an application, carry out background checks, including
investigation  of criminal  history  and inspection  of the facilities  of the applicant,  that the Authority
considers necessary.
(2) The Authority shall, within sixty days after the receipt of an application, if the Authority
determines that the applicant has satisfied the conditions of a licence, grant the app licant a licence.
(3) A licence  issued  under  subsection  (2) shall
(a) be in the form  determined by the Authority;
(b) bear the name and address of  the licensee;
(c) indicate  the date of issue;
(d) be valid for  one year  from  the date  of issue  and is renewable;  and
(e) be subject  to the  terms and  conditions determined  by the  Board; and bear the seal
of the Authority.
Non-transferability  of licence
39. A licence  issued  under this Act is  not transferable.
Renewal of licence
40. (1) A licence granted under  section 38 may be renewed, if the application  for renewal  is
(a) made within  thirty days before  the licence expires ;
(b) signed  and accompanied  with a statutory  declaration  by the  applicant;  and
(c)   in the form  determined  by the  Authority;
(d)   not in  breach of  any of  the terms  and conditions  of the licence;
(e) accompanied with  the valid  tax clearance  certificate;  and
(f) accompanied with the  prescribed fee for  the renewal  of the licence.
(2) An application for renewal shall satisfy the requirements for grant of a licence.
Suspension  of licence
41.  (1) The Authority may suspend the licence of a meteorological  service provider  or
agent or  where the Authority determines that the meteorological agent  has failed  to perform the
function specified  in the licence .
(2) The Authority shall  suspend the  licence,  if the  Authority
(a) gives at least ten days' notice to the service provider  or agent  whose licence the
Authority intends to suspend;
(b) states  in the notice  the grounds  for the suspension;
(c) serves on the service provider  or agent  a copy of any complaint or charges which
the Authority proposes to consider; and
(d) gives  the agent,  the opportunity  to be heard  either in  person or  be represented  by a
14
lawyer, and examine and cross -examine witnesses and present documents and
other evidence in support of the case of that service provider  or agent  .
(3) The Authority  shall  suspend  the licence  of a meteorological service provider  or Agent
who,  after being given notice, fails to take the required remedial action within the specified time.
Revocation  of licence
42. Subject to this Act , the Authority  shall  revoke  the licence of an agent  or servic e if the
Authority determines that
(a) the licence was obtained by fraud ;
(b) the  agent is convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction for a serious offence;
(c) in the performance  of a function  authorised  by the licence,  the agent knowingly  makes
a fraudulent misrepresentation ; or
(d) the equipment of the agent is found to be substandard during inspections.
Restoration of licences
43. The Authority shall restore a licence if the licensee  complies  with the directi ves issued  by
the Authority.
Appeals to the Tribunal
44. (1) An Applicant who is aggrieved by  a decision of the Authority in respect of a
suspension, revocation or refusal to  grant a  licence shall appeal to the Appeal tribunal .
(2)  The decision of the tribunal shall be final and binding.
Confidentiality
45. (1) A member of the Board,  the Dir ector-General, or any other of ficer or employee  of the
Authority shal l
(a) subject to any existing law, treat  as confidential any in formation obtai ned in the
exercise of p owers or  the p erformance of duties under  this Act; and
(b) not dis close any information except  when required to do  so by a court, under
any enac tment or  other circ umstances d etermined by the Board.
(3) Any per son who contravenes  to subsection ( 1) shall be sub ject to disci plinary action,
and in the case of a  member of the Board be l iable to be removed  from  the Boa rd.
Improper use of the  official seal of the organi sation
46. (1) A perso n shall not, without the authority of the Minister use
(a) the of ficial seal and e mblem  of the World Meteorological Organisation  as specified in
the schedule ; or
(b) the desi gnation "World Meteorological Or ganization" or an abb reviation of
that designation.
(3) A person  who contravenes su bsection (1) comm its an offence and is liable on
summary convi ction to a fine not  exceeding 200 penalty units and s hall forfeit to the Republ ic
the goods in co nnection with  which the  seal, emblem or de signat ion was used.
15
Offence s
47. (1) A person shall not
(a) provide or secure meteorological data for use in or out of of Ghana,
without a license granted by the Authority;
(b) contravenes the regulations, rules, orders or directives issued under any of
the provisions of this Act;
(2) A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence is liable
....................................................
Offences   by a body of persons
48. (1) Where  an offence is committed  by a body of persons
(a) in the c ase of a body corpo rate, every d irector or officer of that body corporate
shall be dee med to have com mitted that of fence;  and
(b) in the case of a par tnership or a f irm, every partner  of the partnership or  firm
shall be dee med to have com mitted that of fence
(2) A person  shall not be deemed to have committed an offence und er subsection (1) , if that
person proves that the act  in respect of which  that person is charged was committed by some
other person  without the consent  or connivance of that  perso n and  that the per son exe rcised all
due diligence to prevent the commission of t he offence hav ing re gard to all the circumstances.
Miscellaneous Provisions
Power to enter land or premises
49. (1) For the purpose of carrying out a function under this Act, an officer of the
Authority may, after giving notice to the owner or occupier of any land or premises, enter the
land or premises and do any act reasonably necessary for carrying out the function and in particular
may
(a) inspect and examine a land, building or equipment of  meteorological stations;
(b) inspect and examine accounts, records and memoranda required to be kept by
meteorological stations;
(c) cut down and remove any tree, underwood or structure that may interfere with
surveys; and
(d) remove any installation which constitutes  a hindrance to the deli very of
meteorological climate in consultation with the Environmental Protection
Authority.
(2) The Authority shall pay compensation for any damage caused as a result of action taken
under subsection (1), and the liability for and the amount of the compensation shall in case of
dispute be settled in the first instance by negotiation.
(3) The Authority may delegate a power under this section to the relevant District
Assembly.
Execution of contract
50.    (1) The use of the seal of the Authority shall b e authenticated by the signatures of
(a) the Director -General; and
16
(b) the chairperson of the Board or in the absence of the chairperson any other officer
of the Authority authorised by the Authority to authenticate the use of the seal.
(2) An instrument or contract which if executed or entered into by a person other than a
body corporate would not require to be under seal, may be executed or entered into on behalf of
the Authority by the Director -General or any member of the Authority if the p erson has previously
been authorised by a decision of the board to execute or enter into that particular agreement or
contract.
(3) Th is section is subject to section 12 of the Contracts Act, 1960 (Act 25).
Regula tions
51. (1) The Minist er may by legislative instrument  make regulations to provide for
(a) guidelines for climatic requirement for sectoral activities;
(b) the establishment  of meteorological  stations;
(c) matters in respect  of which fees are payable;
(d) aerona utical services;
(e) uniform standards  in the ob servation of  meteorological pheno mena; and
(f) provide for the requirement for the grant of a  licence.
Interpr etation.
52. In this A ct unless the c ontext  otherwise requires;
“Authority ” means the G hana M eteorological Authority es tablished under  section
1 of this Ac t;
“Aeronautical service” includes infor mation, di rection and other facilities  furnished,
issued or prov ided in connection  with meteorological for ecasts or dat a;
“agro-meteorology” means the application of  meteorological information and
data in the monitoring and manag ement of agr icultural activities;
“Board ” means the gov erning body of the Authority established  under section 4
of this Act;
“Conventio ns” means the WMO Convention, the Convention of the In ternational
Civil  Aviat ion O rganisation, Framework  Convention  on Cli matic Change and
Convent ion to Combat Des ertification and Drough t;
“meteorology” means the study de aling with pheno mena of the  a
atmosphe re;
“meteorological services ” means
“meteorological services providers ” means …………………………………
“Minister ” means the M inister re sponsible for  Communications;
“operational  hydro logy” means the prac tical ap plication of  meteorology in relation
to wat er and flood manage ment;
“premises” includes any  building or land, sh ip, aircraft, caravan but does  not
17
include a bui lding or  place used exclusively as a dwelling  place;
“sectoral activitie s” includes activ ities related  to agriculture,  marine, c ivil
aviation, cons truction  and bui lding works, env ironment, wa ter resou rces
and n atural disaster;
“upper air ” refers to any level above ten meters from the surface of the earth;
“weather” means the state of the a tmosphe re wh ich cons ists of the short-term on the
scale of minutes to days varia tion of the at mosphe re.
Repeal  and savings
53. (1) The Ghana Meteorological Agency Act, 2004 (Act 682)  is hereby re pealed.
(2)  Notwithstanding  the repeal under subse ction (1) any  contracts, orders or deci sions or
anyth ing made or  done by a body which until t he coming into force of this Act, was charged with
the performance of  any of the functions un der this A ct shall, be valid and con tinue in force as if
it was made or  done under th is Act.
Transitional provisions
54. (1) The rights, assets, and liabilities that have accrued in respect of the properties
vested in Ghana Me teorological Agency in existence immediately before the coming into force
of this Act shall be transferred to the Ghana Meteorological Authority established under this Act.
(2)  A person in the employment of the Ghana Meteorological Agency immediately before
the coming into force  of this Act, shall on the coming into force of this Act, be deemed to have
been duly employed by the Ghana Meteorological Authority established under this Act on the
terms and conditions which are not less favourable in aggregate to the terms and conditio ns
attached to the post held by th e person before the coming into force of this Act.
(3) A contract subsisting between the Ghana Meteorological Agency and another person
and in effect immediately before the coming into force of th is Act shall subs ist between the Ghana
Meteorological Authority and that other person subject to modifications that are necessary to
ensure compliance with this Act.
(4) A person whose license ceases to be valid under the Ghana Meteorological Agency may
apply to t he Ghana Meteorological Authority under this Act.